Appendix Revision (#294)
worldbank/d4di: appendix/stata-guide.tex

\begin{fullwidth}

Most academic programs that prepare students for a career
in the type of work discussed in this book
spend a disproportionately small amount of time teaching their students coding skills
in relation to the share of their professional time they will spend writing code
their first years after graduating.
Recent Masters' program graduates that have joined our team
tended to have very good knowledge in the theory of our

> trade, but also to require a lot of training in its practical skills.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
trade, but have required a lot of training in its practical skills.
```

It is also less error-prone and easier to update if you want to change the condition.

\codeexample{stata-conditional-expressions2.do}{./code/stata-conditional-expressions2.do}

\subsection{Using macros}

Stata has several types of \textbf{macros} where numbers or text can be stored temporarily,
but the two most common macros are \textbf{local} and \textbf{global}.
All macros should be defined using the \texttt{=} operator.
Never abbreviate the commands for \textbf{local} and \textbf{global}.
Locals should always be the default type and globals should only
be used when the information stored is used in a different do-file.
Globals are error-prone since they are active as long as Stata is open,
which creates a risk that a global from one project is incorrectly used in another,
so only use globals where they are necessary.
Our recommendation is that globals should only be defined in the \textbf{master do-file}.
All globals should be referenced using both the the dollar sign and curly brackets around their name (\texttt{\$\{\}});
otherwise, they can cause readability issues when the endpoint of the macro name is unclear.

> You should use descriptive names for all macros (up to 32 characters; prefer fewer).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should use descriptive names for all macros (up to 32 characters; preferably fewer).
```

Simple prefixes are useful and encouraged such as \texttt{thisParam}, \texttt{allParams},
\texttt{theLastParam}, \texttt{allParams}, or \texttt{nParams}.
There are several naming conventions you can use for macros with long or multi-word names.
Which one you use is not as important as whether you and your team are consistent in how you name then.
You can use all lower case (\texttt{mymacro}), underscores (\texttt{my\_macro}),
or ``camel case'' (\texttt{myMacro}), as long as you are consistent.
Nested locals are also possible for a variety of reasons when looping.
Finally, if you need a macro to hold a literal macro name,
it can be done using the backslash escape character;
this causes the stored macro to be evaluated
at the usage of the macro rather than at its creation.

\codeexample{stata-macros.do}{./code/stata-macros.do}

\subsection{Writing file paths}

All file paths should always be enclosed in double quotes,

> and should \textbf{always use forward slashes} for folder hierarchies (\texttt{/}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and should always use forward slashes for folder hierarchies (\texttt{/}).
```
While your pet peeve, I do not think it warrants bold more than other things here.

File names should be written in lower case with dashes (\texttt{my-file.dta}).
Mac and Linux computers cannot read file paths with backslashes,

> and backslashes cannot be removed with find-and-replace.

Reviewer: what is this based on?

Author: What part?

Reviewer: "_backslashes cannot be removed with find-and-replace_"

Author: Haha well, they can't! Since you'll have lots of legitimate backslashes for other purposes, you'll basically have to review every case anyway

but there they are always relative to the location of the file running the code.
Stata does not provide this functionality.

\textbf{Dynamic} file paths use global macros for the location of the root folder.
These globals should be set in a central master do-file.
This makes it possible to write file paths that work very similarly to relative paths.
It also achieves the functionality that setting \texttt{cd} is often intended to:
executing the code on a new system only requires updating file path globals in one location.
If global names are unique, there is no risk that files are saved in the incorrect project folder.
You can create multiple folder globals as needed and this is encouraged.

\codeexample{stata-filepaths.do}{./code/stata-filepaths.do}

\subsection{Line breaks}

Long lines of code are difficult to read if you have to scroll left and right to see the full line of code.
When your line of code is wider than text on a regular paper, you should introduce a line break.
A common line breaking length is around 80 characters.
Stata and other code editors provide a visible ``guide line''.
Around that length, start a new line using \texttt{///}.

> You can and should write comments after \texttt{///} just as with \texttt{//}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can write comments after \texttt{///} just as with \texttt{//}, and that is usually a good thing.
```
Seemed like a too strong recommendation with `should` as there is many times there is nothing to write.

> (The \texttt{\#delimit} command is only acceptable for advanced function programming

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(The \texttt{\#delimit} command should only be used for advanced function programming
```
Also too strong wording

  \url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/wiki/ID\_Variable\_Properties}}
ID variables are also perfect variables to sort on,
and to \texttt{order} first in the data set.

The command \texttt{compress} makes the data set smaller in terms of memory usage
without ever losing any information.
It optimizes the storage types for all variables
and therefore makes it smaller on your computer
and faster to send over a network or the internet.

\codeexample{stata-before-saving.do}{./code/stata-before-saving.do}

\subsection{Miscellaneous notes}

Use wildcards in variable names (\texttt{xx\_?\_*\_xx}) sparingly,
as they may change results if the dataset changes.
Write multiple graphs as \texttt{tw (xx)(xx)(xx)}, not \texttt{tw xx||xx||xx}.
Put spaces around each binary operator except \texttt{\^}.
Therefore write \texttt{gen z = x + y} and \texttt{x\^}\texttt{2}.
When order of operations applies, use spacing and parentheses:
\texttt{hours + (minutes/60) + (seconds/3600)}, not \texttt{hours + minutes / 60 + seconds / 3600}.
For long expressions, the operator starts the new line, so:

\texttt{gen sumvar =   x ///}

\texttt{             + y ///}

\texttt{             - z ///}

> \texttt{             + a*(b-c)}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\texttt{             + a * (b - c)}
```
We just said tat we should use space between these operators

\noindent Make sure your code doesn't print very much to the results window as this is slow.
This can be accomplished by using \texttt{run file.do} rather than \texttt{do file.do}.
Run outputs like \texttt{reg} using the \texttt{qui} prefix.
Never use interactive commands like \texttt{sum} or \texttt{tab} in dofiles,

> unless they are combined with \texttt{qui} for the purpose of getting \texttt{r()}-statistics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
unless for the purpose of getting \texttt{r()}-statistics.
```
Why `qui`? I can agree taht is a good preference, but I do not see a reason to say that you cannot use `sum` and `tab` unless combined with `qui`

Author: I guess the point is more general -- which is, nothing you do should be intended to be read in the results window, so well-styled code doesn't slow down execution by printing things to the results window. Does that make more sense to write out explicitly?

Relative file paths are common in many other programming languages,
but there they are always relative to the location of the file running the code.
Stata does not provide this functionality.

\textbf{Dynamic} file paths use global macros for the location of the root folder.
These globals should be set in a central master do-file.
This makes it possible to write file paths that work very similarly to relative paths.
It also achieves the functionality that setting \texttt{cd} is often intended to:
executing the code on a new system only requires updating file path globals in one location.
If global names are unique, there is no risk that files are saved in the incorrect project folder.
You can create multiple folder globals as needed and this is encouraged.

\codeexample{stata-filepaths.do}{./code/stata-filepaths.do}

\subsection{Line breaks}

Long lines of code are difficult to read if you have to scroll left and right to see the full line of code.
When your line of code is wider than text on a regular paper, you should introduce a line break.
A common line breaking length is around 80 characters.

> Stata and other code editors provide a visible ``guide line''.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stata's do-file editor and other code editors provide a visible ``guide line''.
```

The negation of logical expressions should use bang (\texttt{!}) and not tilde (\texttt{\~}).
Always use explicit truth checks (\texttt{if `value'==1}) rather than implicits (\texttt{if `value'}).
Always use the \texttt{missing(`var')} function instead of arguments like (\texttt{if `var'<=.}),
and always consider whether missing values will affect the evaluation conditional expressions.

\codeexample{stata-conditional-expressions1.do}{./code/stata-conditional-expressions1.do}

Use \texttt{if-else} statements when applicable
even if you can express the same thing with two separate \texttt{if} statements.
When using \texttt{if-else} statements you are communicating to anyone reading your code
that the two cases are mutually exclusive which makes your code more readable.
It is also less error-prone and easier to update if you want to change the condition.

\codeexample{stata-conditional-expressions2.do}{./code/stata-conditional-expressions2.do}

\subsection{Using macros}

Stata has several types of \textbf{macros} where numbers or text can be stored temporarily,
but the two most common macros are \textbf{local} and \textbf{global}.

> All macros should be defined using the \texttt{=} operator.

Reviewer 2: I think we should discuss this.

Reviewer: Agreed that this should not be our recommendation. When the `=` operator is used long strings are truncated. So unless you know your strings are short then ```local mystr "`str1' `str2'"``` should always be preferred to ```local mystr = "`str1'" + "`str2'"```

Author: I didn't know that. At what length does this happen? I generally use:
```
local mystr = "`str1' `str2'"
```

Reviewer 2: Moved to #380

Reviewer: moved to : https://github.com/worldbank/d4di/issues/380

Never abbreviate the commands for \textbf{local} and \textbf{global}.
Locals should always be the default type and globals should only
be used when the information stored is used in a different do-file.
Globals are error-prone since they are active as long as Stata is open,
which creates a risk that a global from one project is incorrectly used in another,
so only use globals where they are necessary.
Our recommendation is that globals should only be defined in the \textbf{master do-file}.
All globals should be referenced using both the the dollar sign and curly brackets around their name (\texttt{\$\{\}});
otherwise, they can cause readability issues when the endpoint of the macro name is unclear.

You should use descriptive names for all macros (up to 32 characters; prefer fewer).
Simple prefixes are useful and encouraged such as \texttt{thisParam}, \texttt{allParams},

> \texttt{theLastParam}, \texttt{allParams}, or \texttt{nParams}.

Reviewer 2: I think this is a matter of personal preference. I agree `lastParam` is a useful name, but `thisParam` is not. And I know Ben likes to use `theLocal`, and it may be cute, but it's not strictly necessary. Either way, `allParams` is listed twice.

Author: should we offer more general rules on case, ie "any naming style so long as consistent"? But `the_underscore_style` uses up characters fast. And otherwise things shouldn't be in caps right. What do you usually do?

These globals should be set in a central master do-file.
This makes it possible to write file paths that work very similarly to relative paths.
This achieves the functionality that setting \texttt{cd} is often intended to:
executing the code on a new system only requires updating file path globals in one location.
If global names are unique, there is no risk that files are saved in the incorrect project folder.
You can create multiple folder globals as needed and this is encouraged.

\codeexample{stata-filepaths.do}{./code/stata-filepaths.do}

\subsection{Line breaks}

Long lines of code are difficult to read if you have to scroll left and right to see the full line of code.
When your line of code is wider than text on a regular paper, you should introduce a line break.
A common line breaking length is around 80 characters.
Stata and other code editors provide a visible ``guide line''.
Around that length, start a new line using \texttt{///}.
You can and should write comments after \texttt{///} just as with \texttt{//}.
(The \texttt{\#delimit} command is only acceptable for advanced function programming
and is officially discouraged in analytical code.\cite{cox2005styleguide}

> Never, for any reason, use \texttt{/* */} to wrap a line.)

Reviewer 2: Explain why not

Author: Lol it shouldn't even be legal. I'm actually struggling for words why not. It's just .. so ridiculous

Reviewer 2: Addressed in 627521b730fade830717a937dfb8bd1efe16f84e

otherwise, they can cause readability issues when the endpoint of the macro name is unclear.

You should use descriptive names for all macros (up to 32 characters; preferably fewer).
There are several naming conventions you can use for macros with long or multi-word names.
Which one you use is not as important as whether you and your team are consistent in how you name then.
You can use all lower case (\texttt{mymacro}), underscores (\texttt{my\_macro}),
or ``camel case'' (\texttt{myMacro}), as long as you are consistent.
Simple prefixes are useful and encouraged such as \texttt{this_estimate} or \texttt{current_var},

> or (using texttt{camelCase}) \texttt{lastValue}, \texttt{allValues}, or \texttt{nValues}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
or (using \texttt{camelCase}) \texttt{lastValue}, \texttt{allValues}, or \texttt{nValues}.
```
